Bernardo, there are millions of people
in this world who are not
happy with their work situation,
who dream of being an entrepreneur,
in many cases they only dream of
it because they never give the
pass, and of those who give the
pass, in addition, many,
by pure statistics, many fail,
fail at first, not even are able
to take forward their project,
which is a pity because
many resources are lost, people
suffer a lot, etc.
What advice would you give
to any of our students who are
in that situation, who want
to take the first step?
The first thing you have...
I would tell you three things.
The first is that they are
convinced that they really want
to do this and that not only
a dream, that they have the real motivation
to want to build something big
and to make the effort, will probably
be the most difficult thing they
do in their life, being an entrepreneur
is very, very, very difficult.
It is an adventure often alone,
with a leadership both emotional
and technical, as strategic,
very important, where it will require
an extraordinary effort
on the part of the person
and they have to be aware.
I think that the entrepreneur is
not born, I think that we can
all be entrepreneurs, but you have
to be aware, many times you are
not aware, but you have to be
willing to make the effort
that will require.
I would tell anyone who has the
motivation that it is not a job
option, it is a life option.
How do you perceive the fact that, I’ve
seen it many times, there are people
who fall in love with maybe too
much of their idea?
It seems that the world stops and that
they have the idea with which they
will solve the most important
problem and sometimes lose objectivity.
Have you met such people?
I have always said to myself
that you should love the problem,
not the solution.
In the test, our egos tend to
think that the solution
we have found to a problem
is unique.
And you have to fall in love with
the problem and not the solution,
have the sucking humility
to recognize that maybe your
approach is not the right one
and that you are doing that
to solve a problem, not to
show the world how ready you
are, but to solve a problem.
It is important to remember it and
always recognize it.
This is a very important issue
because I have seen entrepreneurs
who don’t end up having failure
is fundamentally a matter
of ego.
Being a successful entrepreneur is
that fine balance between having
a very strong personality, with
a very strong ego, that makes
you face very serious challenges,
but at the same time the sucking
waist and humility as to recognize
when you are wrong and change.
Then that balance between not
being too weak to be constantly
changing, because then you will
take the breath to a wind, not
too stubborn as not to be flexible
to change when you have
to do so.
And that belt, that balance is very
complicated.
I’ve already told you that I’ve seen
many entrepreneurs who have failed
because they’ve been very weak and
have thrown the towel immediately, or
others because they’re too dull and
believe they’re more smart than the
rest of the people and crash against
a wall 200 kilometers away...
Even though everyone is leaving them...
Yes, but when...
One characteristic of entrepreneur
is that, it is the opposite,
it is the ability to go with the
counter-current.
So many people who grow up, when
more they say no, no, no, no,
the most convinced is.
Then the line between timidity
and being brave and bravery
is very fine.
What advice would you give them about associating
with more people or not going alone
or what to look for in accompanying?
In this line I just said,
being accompanied
helps a lot.
If you are able to have the
generosity of integrating a partner,
you are demonstrating a skill
of being able to understand the
world differently, and that helps,
not only because you have 50% of
the load, but because you have
someone next to you who is complementing
you and intellectually challenging
that that’s fine.
It complements you.
In addition, I think it is convenient
to look for people who are
not exactly the same as you, that
generate some synergy in the team.